Draft proposed updates to risk factors/social determinants of health section (#881)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/40.inequality.md

### Abstract

### Importance

### Introduction

_Severe acture respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2_ (SARS-CoV-2) virus has presented a serious worldwide threat since late 2019.
The scientific community has responded by rapidly collecting information and conducting research about the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the associated illness, novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The biology of the SARS-CoV-2 virus provides important insight into the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and the disease's effect on the human body [@individual-pathogenesis].
Siminarly, a thorough understanding of the biology of the human host is also critical to understanding the clinical manifestations of the disease.
A complete perspective on this disease therefore also requires considering factors that shape variation in human biology, including the environmental factors that have been identified to influence COVID-19 outcomes.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, a number of risk factors have been widely disseminated.
These include health conditions such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, and heart disease [@url:https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/coronavirus/symptoms-causes/syc-20479963].

> An observed association among racial and ethnic background and COVID-19 outcomes has also led to racial and ethnic minorities frequently being included on the list of groups with increased susceptibility (e.g., [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/index.html]).

Author: @RLordan I am reading that paper as saying it's always worse, but now it's even more worse? Did have a different impression? It's a great analysis, we should definitely add a citation!

> An observed association among racial and ethnic background and COVID-19 outcomes has also led to racial and ethnic minorities frequently being included on the list of groups with increased susceptibility (e.g., [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/index.html]).

Reviewer: Pretty much the same impression for that paper, which was a great analysis. however, there was another paper I wanted to point out that I meant to put there, I will have to chase it down again. It was somewhat in disagreement with the idea that these communities had increased susceptibility. It was only an short paper though/perspective style report

Additionally, chronic stress may expedite physical and mental decline associated with age [@doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2009.09040461; @doi:10.1001/archinte.1997.00440400111013].
Other health conditions, such as hypertension, obesity, and cancer have also been linked to allostatic load [@doi:10.1001/archinte.1997.00440400111013; @doi:10.1073/pnas.081072698].
These health disparities render chronic stress a risk factor on a biological level.
Additionally, the list of risks associated with allostatic load closely echoes the list of comorbidities associated with more severe COVID-19 outcomes.

### COVID-19 "Risk Factors"

As COVID-19 has spread into communities around the globe, it has become clear that the risks associated with this disease are not equally shared by all individuals or all communities.
Significant disparities in outcomes have led to interest in the demographic, biomedical, and social factors associated with COVID-19 severity.
Untangling the factors that influence COVID-19 outcomes is a complex undertaking.

> Among patients who are admitted to the hospital, outcomes have generally been poor, with rates of admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) upwards of 15% in both Wuhan, China and Italy [@doi:10.1056/nejmoa2002032; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.2648; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4031].

Author: I actually disagree with this change because I think it makes Wuhan and China sound like separate items in a list! Would it help to say "Italy and Wuhan, China"?

> Among patients who are admitted to the hospital, outcomes have generally been poor, with rates of admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) upwards of 15% in both Wuhan, China and Italy [@doi:10.1056/nejmoa2002032; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.2648; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4031].

Reviewer: I see your point, Yes I think "Italy and Wuhan, China" would do it.

Diabetes may increase the duration of hospitalization [@doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2020.04.021] and the risk of death [@doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2020.04.021;@doi:10.1007/s00592-020-01546-0].
Obesity also appears to be associated with higher risk of severe outcomes from SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2020.154262; @doi:10.1101/2020.04.23.20076042].
Dementia and cancer were also associated with the risk of death in an analysis of a large number (more than 20,000) of COVID-19 patients in the United Kingdom [@doi:10.1136/bmj.m1985].

These health conditions affect biology in ways that are expected to overlap with the pathogenesis of COVID-19.
Analyses investigating possible functional relationships between diabetes and COVID-19 have revealed that _ACE2_ expression may be elevated in individuals with diabetes mellitus [@doi:10.2337/dc20-0643] and that ketoacidosis, a metabolic disorder typically associated with diabetes, is observed in COVID-19 patients with and without diabetes [@doi:10.1111/dom.14057].
These findings suggest that the pathology of diabetes may overlap with the pathology of COVID-19 [@doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00124.2020].

> Although a clear functional connection between obesity and COVID-19 outcomes has not yet been established [@doi:10.1016/j.medj.2020.06.005], obesity is correlated with other comorbid conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and pulmonary disease, as well as to chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1007/s11695-020-04677-z].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although a clear functional connection between obesity and COVID-19 outcomes are not yet established [@doi:10.1016/j.medj.2020.06.005], obesity is correlated with other comorbid conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and pulmonary disease, as well as to chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1007/s11695-020-04677-z].
```
```suggestion
Although a clear functional connection between obesity and COVID-19 outcomes has not yet been established [@doi:10.1016/j.medj.2020.06.005], obesity is correlated with other comorbid conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and pulmonary disease, as well as to chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1007/s11695-020-04677-z].
```

Reviewer: Super perspective here to consider: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2021.01.010

> Although a clear functional connection between obesity and COVID-19 outcomes are not yet established [@doi:10.1016/j.medj.2020.06.005], obesity is correlated with other comorbid conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and pulmonary disease, as well as to chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1007/s11695-020-04677-z].

Author: ```suggestion
Although a clear functional connection between obesity and COVID-19 outcomes is not yet established [@doi:10.1016/j.medj.2020.06.005], obesity is correlated with other comorbid conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and pulmonary disease, as well as to chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1007/s11695-020-04677-z].
Structural racism has been proposed as a driver of obesity [@doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2021.01.010].
```

### Abstract

### Importance

### Introduction

_Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2_ (SARS-CoV-2) virus has become a serious worldwide threat since late 2019.
The scientific community has responded by rapidly collecting information and conducting research about the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the associated illness, novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The biology of the SARS-CoV-2 virus provides important insight into the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and the disease's effect on the human body [@individual-pathogenesis].
Similarly, a thorough understanding of the biology of the human host is also critical to understanding the clinical manifestations of the disease.
A complete perspective on this disease therefore also requires considering factors that shape variation in human biology, including the environmental factors that are known to influence COVID-19 outcomes.

During the pandemic, a number of risk factors have been associated with COVID-19
These include health conditions such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, and heart disease [@url:https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/coronavirus/symptoms-causes/syc-20479963; @doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2020.04.021].

> An observed association among racial and ethnic background and COVID-19 outcomes has also led to racial and ethnic minorities frequently being included on the list of groups with increased susceptibility (e.g., [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/index.html]).

Reviewer 2: Something I'm wondering here- this paper discusses COVID-19 on a global scale, but I feel like this sentence is very country specific (because as you outline below, racial and ethnic background on a global scale does not seem to be associated with COVID-19 outcomes, but minority racial status seems to be) Just thinking that you might want to specify that this observation is context-dependent? such as "An observed association in several countries among racial and ethnic background and COVID-19 outcomes has also led to racial and ethnic minorities frequently being included on the list of groups with increased susceptibility"

Author: This is a really good point! I will clean this up.

> However, it is well documented that these health conditions occur at higher rates in communities of color.<!-- To Do: Add citation-->

Reviewer 2: and same question here- isn't this statement more specific to communities of color within majority-white countries?

Therefore, COVID-19 risk must be considered in the context of not only social and environmental but also biological mechanisms through which systemic racism can drive the heavy toll of the pandemic on communities of color.

In this review, we seek to contextualize the social factors associated with COVID-19 severity and to explore how the biological implications of chronic stress intersect with the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2.
First, we outline the potential biological basis of several risk factors that have been identified for COVID-19.
While the term risk factors implies that they themselves predispose an individual to increased susceptibility of infection and more severe COVID-19 outcomes, we argue that this is a more nuanced question where the interrelatedness of these factors and their association with poverty and racism must be considered.
Next, we discuss how the conditions presented by systematic discrimination may predispose some individuals both to exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and to more severe outcomes of the disease it causes.

> Many of the social factors associated with elevated allostatic load are also correlated with the likelihood that an individual will be exposed to SARS-CoV-2 in the first place.

Reviewer 2: define the first instance of the term "allostatic load"? Could change this sentence to "Many of the social factors associated with the negative physiological consequences of chronic stress (known as "allostatic load") are also correlated with the likelihood that an individual..."

This hypothesis is supported by some preliminary evidence showing that female patients who recovered from severe COVID-19 had higher antibody titers than males [@doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1008570].
Sex steroids can also bind to immune cell receptors to influence cytokine production [@doi:10.1186/s13293-020-00304-9].
Thus, both age and sex are thought to have some intrinsic relationship to risk, but also to be correlated with social factors contributing to risk, although it should be noted that both transgender men and women are suspected to be at heightened risk [@url:https://escholarship.org/uc/item/55t297mc].

#### Comorbid Health Conditions

A number of pre-existing or comorbid conditions have repeatedly been identified as risk factors associated with more severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Several underlying health conditions were identified at high prevalence among hospitalized patients, including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, lung disease, and cardiovascular disease [@doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6915e3].

> Higher sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) scores have been associated with a higher probability of mortality [@doi:10/ggnxb3], and comorbid conditions such as cardiovascular and lung diseases as well as obesity were also associated with an increased risk of hospitalization and death, even when correcting for age and sex [@doi:10.1136/bmj.m1985].

Reviewer 2: One thought I've been having while reading through this is the use of the word "obesity." I've been trying to read more about the supposed connection between obesity and COVID-19 infection/outcomes (like this review- @doi.org/10.1111/obr.13128) but I don't see mention (except for one included paper) of controlling for other health conditions a person might have (type II diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease) or their race, socioeconomic status, and access to healthcare or discrimination experienced while seeking healthcare. For we know the characterization of obesity as a disease is steeped in racism, and that people of higher weights experience excessive discrimination when seeking healthcare (for example- an H1N1 study found a correlation between higher weight and complications/ risk of death, but also that higher weight people were less likely to be prescribed early antiviral treatment...thus indicating healthcare discrimination could be a confounding variable @doi.org/10.1080/23744235.2016.1201721). I feel like obesity is often used as a proxy when researchers/clinicians are really talking about metabolic disturbances or other health conditions... just wondering if you all want to rethink the use of the word/ this framing in the paper. I'm happy to do more research on the topic or help rephrase things if you would like! I found these articles really helpful for learning more: url:https://sph.umich.edu/pursuit/2018posts/3-ways-public-health-professionals-can-combat-weight-stigma.html; url: https://www.huffpost.com/entry/fat-covid-19-pandemic-obesity_l_5f736f60c5b6e99dc3336e3e

Reviewer 3: This is just my opinion, but I think that in the context of a review it would be better to continue to say "obesity."  We could of course add that the problem is probably metabolic conditions associated with the high weight, rather then the weight itself, but I don't think we should change what the original research papers reported.

Reviewer 3: I would be okay with saying "high BMI" if you feel very strongly that the word "obesity" itself is pejorative, but I don't see how that would actually help.

Reviewer: To maybe give some context to your observations @juliettemarie0405 

It is proposed that the underlying link between obesity and increased risk of COVID-19 is low-grade or systemic inflammation. Hence why other conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, CVD, and aging are also associated with increased risk of COVID-19 (all characterized by systemic inflammation-https://www.nature.com/articles/s41366-020-0597-4; and https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/people-with-medical-conditions.html). Many papers don't control for one or the other because many people have more than 1 of these conditions. You can be both type II diabetic and obese and even have hyperlipidemia, which in turn would increase one's risk of COVID-19. Heaped together, many people that are overweight or obese have metabolic syndrome, which is a clustering of these conditions. These non-communicable diseases (NCDs) or comorbidites are more prevalent in African Americans and you can be sure that social determinants of health is one of the reasons for that. 

There was a similar increased risk associated with NCDs for H1N1, but in contrast to COVID-19, obesity and asthma were not associated with increased risk [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001053].

You are right that obesity of course has connotations attached, but I think from a scientific standpoint it is fair to use the term. Particularly since it is a key component of metabolic syndrome. However, I take your point about from the example of the H1N1, there is certainly medical prejudice. Maybe we can acknowledge this somehow in the text.

Reviewer 3: I think that some of the controversies that become associated with the idea of "risk factors" are related to the fact that different people and fields use the term in different ways.  Some use the term only when they believe there is a direct cause-and-effect relationship, while others use the 
term for anything that is a significant statistical predictor of an outcome (even if it might be a proxy for something else that's harder to measure).  It's unfortunate that the same word is used in those two different ways, but we cannot fix it here.  The former definition is more natural for what we ordinarily mean by risk, in the sense of somebody doing something dangerous.  But I think the latter definition is actually more common in the field.

Author: I think it would be great to link this back to the medical discrimination that @tlukan wrote about in text below -- and also, I know @RLordan and I are really hoping we can make it clear how inflammation (which we want to make sure is contextualized alongside experiences/environment because they are so closely tied together) ties a lot of fragments of the COVID-19 story together. In this case, obesity/high BMI/whatever we want to call it can be view as a signal of inflammation, but it is also associated (causally or not) with other factors that can influence health outcomes (medical discrimination, as @juliettemarie0405 mentioned, or also racial discrimination since BMI is not an inclusive measure, also often prevalent in places with limited access to health-related resources and/or low SES, etc.)

One thing I was hoping to do while I was writing this draft was to try to drag any "I'm a biologist, I don't care about social sciences" people reading it along with us by working out in circles from things they would view as biological (e.g., obesity) and eventually tying it in to systemic effects that elevate inflammation. It seems like I need to revisit this because it's not working the way it is! I really appreciate all the feedback (and the references @juliettemarie0405!)

Reviewer: All true, I think it would be fair to say in my world we often dip into both definitions blindly haha

Reviewer: Also, welcome @juliettemarie0405 !

Reviewer 2: Thank you @RLordan! And thank you for that very helpful explanation of the role of inflammation in all of this, and for pointing out the difficulties in controlling for comorbidities. I really appreciate the opportunity to discuss this with all of you, and I am excited by the idea of introducing this discussion to readers as well. @rando2 I really like how you framed it- that the underlying thread in all of this is inflammation, that there are many causative forces, and that higher weight should be reconceptualized as a "signal of inflammation" rather than a condition in and of itself. Even if you all decide to move forward with the term obesity, I really like @RLordan's suggestion of acknowledging how medical prejudice (and racism, poverty, fatphobia) inherently complicate how we understand associations identified in the literature.

These findings suggest that the pathology of diabetes may overlap with the pathology of COVID-19 [@doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00124.2020].
Although a clear functional connection between obesity and COVID-19 outcomes is not yet established [@doi:10.1016/j.medj.2020.06.005], obesity is correlated with other comorbid conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and pulmonary disease, as well as to chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1007/s11695-020-04677-z].
Structural racism has been proposed as a driver of both obesity and severe impacts of COVID-19 [@doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2021.01.010].
Dementia and other forms of cognitive decline are thought to be functionally related to diabetes [@doi:10/c3tm55], and both cancer and dementia are related to chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1038/nature01322; @doi:10.1186/s13195-015-0117-2].

It should be noted that such comorbid conditions are inextricably tied to age, as conditions tend to be accumulated over time, but that the prevalence of individual comorbidities or of population health overall can vary regionally [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2008760117].

> Several comorbidities that are highly prevalent in older adults, such as COPD, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes, have been associated with CFRs upwards of 8% compared to an estimate of 1.4% in people without comorbidities [@doi:10.1111/jgs.16472; @url:https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/report-of-the-who-china-joint-mission-on-coronavirus-disease-2019-(covid-19)]. <!--To Do: will this url work for Manubot?-->

Reviewer 4: No, that URL won't work.  I can add an alias (tag) on your branch as a workaround.

Reviewer 4: Hopefully 11f1d8a and 265daea will fix this.  I'll check the build artifact.

From a genetic standpoint, it is highly unlikely that ancestry itself predisposes individuals from these diverse groups to experiencing severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Human genetic diversity varies over a geographic continuum, and that most human genetic variation is associated with the African continent [@doi:10.1038/ng1438].
African-Americans are also a more genetically diverse group relative to European-Americans, with a large number of rare alleles and a much smaller fraction of common alleles identified in African-Americans [@doi:10.1146/annurev.genom.9.081307.164258].
Therefore, the idea that African ancestry (at the continental level) might convey some sort of genetic risk for severe COVID-19 contrasts with what is known about worldwide human genetic diversity [@doi:10.1126/science.abd4842].
The possibility for genetic variants that confer some risk or some protection remains possible, but has not been widely explored, especially on a global scale.<!--To Do: Check if there are updates here, I think I remember seeing some-->

> Research in Beijing of a small number (n=80) hospitalized COVID-19 patients revealed an association between severe COVID-19 outcomes and homozygosity for an allele in the interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3) gene, which was selected as a candidate because it was previously found to be associated with influenza outcomes in Chinese patients [@doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa224].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Research in Beijing of a small number (n=80) of hospitalized COVID-19 patients revealed an association between severe COVID-19 outcomes and homozygosity for an allele in the interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3) gene, which was selected as a candidate because it was previously found to be associated with influenza outcomes in Chinese patients [@doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa224].
```
```suggestion
Research in Beijing of a small number (n=80) hospitalized COVID-19 patients revealed an association between severe COVID-19 outcomes and homozygosity for an allele in the interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3) gene, which was selected as a candidate because it was previously found to be associated with influenza outcomes in Chinese patients [@doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa224].
```

Research in Beijing of a small number (n=80) of hospitalized COVID-19 patients revealed an association between severe COVID-19 outcomes and homozygosity for an allele in the interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3) gene, which was selected as a candidate because it was previously found to be associated with influenza outcomes in Chinese patients [@doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa224].
Genetic factors may also play a role in the risk of respiratory failure for COVID-19 [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2020283; @doi:10.1093/gerona/glaa131; @doi:10.1101/2020.06.16.155101].
However, genetic variants associated with outcomes within ancestral groups are far more common than genetic variants explaining outcomes between groups.
Alleles in _ACE2_ and transmembrane protease serine protease-2, which is involved in proteolytic priming of SARS-CoV-2 for cell entry [@individual-pathogenesis], have been identified to vary in frequency among ancestral groups [@doi:10.1186/s12916-020-01673-z], but whether these variants are associated with COVID-19 susceptibility has not been explored.

> Instead, examining patterns of COVID-19 susceptibility on a global scale that suggest that social factors are of primary importance in predicting mortality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead, examining patterns of COVID-19 susceptibility on a global scale suggest that social factors are of primary importance in predicting mortality.
```

Reports from several sub-Saharan African countries during 2020 indicated that the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic were less severe than anticipated based on the outbreaks in China and Italy.
In Kenya, for example, estimates of national prevalence based on testing blood donors for SARS-CoV-2 antibodies between April and June 2020 were consistent with approximately 5% of Kenyan adults having recovered from COVID-19 [@doi:10.1126/science.abe1916].
This high seroprevalence of antibodies lies in sharp contrast to the low number of COVID-19 fatalities in Kenya, which by the median date of sampling was 71 out of 2093 known cases [@doi:10.1101/2020.07.27.20162693].

> Likewise, a serosurvey of health care workers in Blantyre City, Malawi reported an adjusted antibody prevalence of 12.3%, suggesting that the virus had been circulating more widely than thought and that the death rate was up eight times lower than models had predicted [@doi:10.1101/2020.07.30.20164970].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Likewise, a serosurvey of health care workers in Blantyre City, Malawi reported an adjusted antibody prevalence of 12.3%, suggesting that the virus had been circulating more widely than thought and that the death rate was up to eight times lower than models had predicted [@doi:10.1101/2020.07.30.20164970].
```

Increased risk of exposure can also arise outside the workplace.
Nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities received attention early on as high-risk locations for COVID-19 outbreaks [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.11642].
The services provided in long-term care facilities can vary widely, with a lower quality of care frequently available to racial and ethnic minorities who need these services [@doi:10.1080/08959420.2020.1772004].

> Prisons and detention centers also confer a high risk of exposure or infection [@doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.1856; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12528], and in the United States, incarcerated people are more likely to be male and persons of color, especially Black [@url:https://www.issuelab.org/resources/695/695.pdf]..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prisons and detention centers also confer a high risk of exposure or infection [@doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.1856; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12528], and in the United States, incarcerated people are more likely to be male and persons of color, especially Black [@url:https://www.issuelab.org/resources/695/695.pdf]..
```
```suggestion
Prisons and detention centers also confer a high risk of exposure or infection [@doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.1856; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12528], and in the United States, incarcerated people are more likely to be male and persons of color, especially Black [@url:https://www.issuelab.org/resources/695/695.pdf].
```

Environmental disparities may also influence differences in COVID-19 outcomes.
A preprint [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.05.20054502] provided observational evidence that geographical areas in the United States that suffer from worse air pollution by fine particulate matter have also suffered more COVID-19 deaths per capita, after adjusting for demographic covariates.<!--To Do: update reference: 10.1126/sciadv.abd4049 -->
Although a lack of individual-level exposure data and the impossibility of randomization make it difficult to elucidate the exact causal mechanism, this finding would be consistent with similar findings for all-cause mortality (e.g., [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1803222115]).
Exposure to air pollution is associated with both poverty (e.g., [@doi:10.3390/ijerph15061114]) and chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.06.002].
Other outcomes of environmental racism, such as the proximity of abandoned uranium mines to Navajo land, can also cause respiratory illnesses and other health issues [@url:https://journalhosting.ucalgary.ca/index.php/jisd/article/view/70753/54416].

> Similarly, preliminary findings indicate that nutritional status (e.g., vitamin D deficiency and other nutritional deficiencies [@individual-nutraceuticals]) may be associated with COVID-19 outcomes, and reduced access to grocery stores and fresh food often co-occurs with environmental racism [@url:https://journalhosting.ucalgary.ca/index.php/jisd/article/view/70753/54416; @doi:10.1056/NEJMp2021264].

Reviewer 2: perhaps this sentence would fit better in the section above that discusses the link between poverty and inflammation (so right before line 211, before the discussion of environmental racism)

In the United States, access to healthcare varies widely, with certain sectors of the workforce less likely to have health insurance; many essential workers in transportation, food service, and other frontline fields are among those likely to be uninsured or underinsured [@doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2020.04.046].

> As of 2018, Hispanic Americans of all races were much less likely to have health insurance than people from non-Hispanic backgrounds [@url:https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2019/demo/p60-267.pdf].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Black Americans, certain Asian American, Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander subgroups, and Hispanic Americans of all races are much less likely to have health insurance than people from non-Hispanic white backgrounds [@url:https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2019/demo/p60-267.pdf; @doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2019.01394; @doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.1476].
```

Allocation of interventions that may reduce suffering, including palliative care, has become critically important [@doi:10.1136/medethics-2020-106460; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1788663].
The ambiguities surrounding the risks and benefits associated with therapeutics that have been approved under emergency use authorizations also present ethical concerns related to the distribution of resources [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
For example, for much of 2020, remdesivir was available for the treatment of COVID-19 under compassionate use guidelines and through expanded access programs, and in many cases has been donated to hospitals by the manufacturer, Gilead [@doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.06.016; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].
Remdesivir is now the only FDA-approved treatment for COVID-19.<!--To Do: cite therapeutics-->
Regulations guiding the distribution of drugs in situations like these typically do not address how to determine which patients receive them [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].

> Prioritizing marginalized groups for treatment with a drug like remdesivir would have been unethical because it would entail disproportionately exposing these groups to a therapeutic for which teh benefits and risks were not yet established [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prioritizing marginalized groups for treatment with a drug like remdesivir would have been unethical because it would entail disproportionately exposing these groups to a therapeutic for which the benefits and risks were not yet established [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
```
```suggestion
Prioritizing marginalized groups for treatment with a drug like remdesivir would have been unethical because it would entail disproportionately exposing these groups to a therapeutic for which teh benefits and risks were not yet established [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
```

#### Access to and Representation in Clinical Trials

Experimental treatments are often made available to patients primarily or even exclusively through clinical trials.
The advantage of this approach is that clinical trials are designed to collect rigorous data about the efficacy of a treatment as well as its safety.
The disadvantage is that access to clinical trials is not equal among all people who suffer from a disease.
Two important considerations that can impact an individual's access to clinical trials are geography and social perceptions of clinical trials.
For the first, the geographic distribution of trial recruitment efforts are typically bounded and can vary widely among difference locations, and for the second, the social context of medical interactions can impact strategies for and the success of outreach to different communities.
Differential access to clinical trials raises concerns because it introduces biases that can influence scientific and medical research on therapeutics and prophylactics broadly.
Concerns about bias in clinical trials need to address both trial recruitment and operation.

> In the present crisis, such biases are particularly salient because COVID-19 is a disease of global concern, and COVID-19 studies that have included worldwide popultions, such as the World Health Organization's (WHO's) Solidarity trial, do not always reach the same conclusions as those conducted exclusively within western, industrialized nations (e.g., remdesivir and tocilizumab <!--To Do: cite therapeutics-->).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the present crisis, such biases are particularly salient because COVID-19 is a disease of global concern, and COVID-19 studies that have included worldwide populations, such as the World Health Organization's (WHO's) Solidarity trial, do not always reach the same conclusions as those conducted exclusively within western, industrialized nations (e.g., remdesivir and tocilizumab <!--To Do: cite therapeutics-->).
```
```suggestion
In the present crisis, such biases are particularly salient because COVID-19 is a disease of global concern, and COVID-19 studies that have included worldwide popultions, such as the World Health Organization's (WHO's) Solidarity trial, do not always reach the same conclusions as those conducted exclusively within western, industrialized nations (e.g., remdesivir and tocilizumab <!--To Do: cite therapeutics-->).
```

As the pandemic has progressed, it has become clear that ICU beds and ventilators are not the only limited resources that needs to be allocated, and, in fact, the survival rate for patients who receive mechanical ventilation is lower than these discussions would suggest [@doi:10.1136/medethics-2020-106460].
Allocation of interventions that may reduce suffering, including palliative care, has become critically important [@doi:10.1136/medethics-2020-106460; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1788663].
The ambiguities surrounding the risks and benefits associated with therapeutics that have been approved under emergency use authorizations also present ethical concerns related to the distribution of resources [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
For example, for much of 2020, remdesivir was available for the treatment of COVID-19 under compassionate use guidelines and through expanded access programs, and in many cases has been donated to hospitals by the manufacturer, Gilead [@doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.06.016; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].

> Remdesivir is now the only FDA-approved treatment for COVID-19.<!--To Do: cite therapeutics-->

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Remdesivir is now the only FDA-approved treatment for COVID-19 [@individual-pharmaceuticals].
```
This will work after #891 is merged.

#### Access to and Representation in Clinical Trials

Experimental treatments are often made available to patients primarily or even exclusively through clinical trials.
The advantage of this approach is that clinical trials are designed to collect rigorous data about the efficacy of a treatment as well as its safety.
The disadvantage is that access to clinical trials is not equal among all people who suffer from a disease.
Two important considerations that can impact an individual's access to clinical trials are geography and social perceptions of clinical trials.
For the first, the geographic distribution of trial recruitment efforts are typically bounded and can vary widely among difference locations, and for the second, the social context of medical interactions can impact strategies for and the success of outreach to different communities.
Differential access to clinical trials raises concerns because it introduces biases that can influence scientific and medical research on therapeutics and prophylactics broadly.
Concerns about bias in clinical trials need to address both trial recruitment and operation.

> In the present crisis, such biases are particularly salient because COVID-19 is a disease of global concern, and COVID-19 studies that have included worldwide populations, such as the World Health Organization's (WHO's) Solidarity trial, do not always reach the same conclusions as those conducted exclusively within western, industrialized nations (e.g., remdesivir and tocilizumab <!--To Do: cite therapeutics-->).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the present crisis, such biases are particularly salient because COVID-19 is a disease of global concern, and COVID-19 studies that have included worldwide populations, such as the World Health Organization's (WHO's) Solidarity trial, do not always reach the same conclusions as those conducted exclusively within western, industrialized nations (e.g., remdesivir and tocilizumab [@individual-pharmaceuticals]).
```

For example, researchers utilized a linguistic analysis to assess mean word count of phrases related to clinical trial enrollment, such as voluntary participation, clinical trial, etc. [@doi:10.1002/cncr.28483].
The data indicated that the mean word count of the entire visit was 1.5 times more for white patients in comparison to Black patients.
In addition, the greatest disparity between white and Black patients' experience was the discussion of risks, with over 2 times as many risk-related words spoken with white patients than Black patients [@doi:10.1002/cncr.28483].
While some plausible reasons for the disparity in communication between physicians and patients could be a lack of awareness and education, mistrust in healthcare professionals, and a lack of health insurance [@doi:10.1002/cncr.28483], a major concern is that patients from certain racial and ethnic groups are marginalized even while seeking healthcare.
The trends observed for other clinical trials raise the concern that COVID-19 clinical trial information may not be discussed as thoroughly or as often with Black patients compared to white patients.

> These discrepancies are especially concerning given that many COVID-19 treatments are being or are considered being made available to patients prior to FDA approval through Emergency Use Authorizations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These discrepancies are especially concerning given that many COVID-19 treatments are being or are being considered being made available to patients prior to FDA approval through Emergency Use Authorizations.
```
